Document the upcoming Linux SDK release (#268)
memfault/memfault-docs: docs/linux/linux-getting-started-guide.mdx

---
id: linux-getting-started-guide
title: Getting Started
sidebar_label: Getting Started
---

import ProjectAwareCreateAProject from "@site/src/components/ProjectAwareCreateAProject";
import {
  LinuxBuildSystemOptionsTabs,
  SYSTEM_YOCTO,
  SYSTEM_OTHER,
} from "@site/src/components/LinuxBuildSystemOptionsTabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

This tutorial will cover integrating the Memfault Linux SDK into a system. This
getting-started guide is designed with systems in mind that are built using
[Yocto][yocto-homepage], but generic instructions are included for other setups.

After you're done, you should have a basic integration setup that can
(optionally) report reboot events to Memfault, and that should serve as a basis
for integration with our additional subsystems such as [OTA][docs-linux-ota].

> 

Author: https://github.com/memfault/memfault-docs/pull/269

## Useful links

- The [source for the Memfault Linux SDK][source-sdk].
- A [sample integration using Yocto][source-yocto-example].

## Integration steps

<ProjectAwareCreateAProject />

### Include `memfaultd` in your build

The `memfaultd` service is the main orchestrator of the subsystems that conform
and are used by the Memfault Linux SDK. As with all our SDKs, it's
[open-source][source-memfaultd].

Among its responsibilities are:

- Keeping a queue of items to be uploaded to the Memfault cloud.
- Controlling whether data is collected from a device or not.
- Interacting and configuring subsystems such as SWUpdate and collectd.

`memfaultd` is required for integration.

<LinuxBuildSystemOptionsTabs>
  <TabItem value={SYSTEM_YOCTO}>

Include the [`meta-memfault`][source-meta-memfault] layer in your
`bblayers.conf` file.

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value={SYSTEM_OTHER}>

Grab a copy of [the source code for `memfaultd`][source-memfaultd] and build
using CMake. The included `/etc/memfaultd.conf` is a built-in default and is not

> meant to be changed. See

Author: I did -- it was named `memfaultd.conf` when I wrote this, I forgot when we wanted to rename it :+1:

  <TabItem value={SYSTEM_YOCTO}>

See the [`memfault-device-info.bb` recipe in our Yocto
example][source-yocto-memfault-device-info-example] for inspiration.

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value={SYSTEM_OTHER}>

Add your executable anywhere in `$PATH` following the example above.

  </TabItem>
</LinuxBuildSystemOptionsTabs>

Note that if the output of `memfault-device-info` changes due to a modification
in the executable, the `memfaultd` daemon needs to be restarted to pick up the
new info.

### Add `/etc/memfaultd.conf` to your build

A [default `memfaultd.conf`][source-memfaultd-conf] is included with
`memfaultd`, and the daemon will fall back to it. All values in it can be
overwritten by adding an `/etc/memfaultd.conf` file to your build. You may copy
parts of it (or the whole file) to customize configuration on your target
device. Note that while the sample file has reasonable defaults for most keys,
it cannot guess a value for some fields such as `software_version`,
`software_type` or `project_key`. Hence, a minimal `/etc/memfaultd.conf` file
should look like this:

```json
{
  "software_version": "1.0.0",
  "software_type": "main",
  "project_key": "<YOUR_PROJECT_KEY>"
}
```

> 

Reviewer: Should we call out that `/etc/memfaultd.conf` is designed to be in a read-only file system?

Read more about [Software Versions and Hardware
Versions][docs-hardware-version-software-version] to better understand these
core Memfault platform concepts.

### Set `enable_data_collection`

By default, `enable_data_collection` is `false` (see the [default
configuration][source-memfaultd-conf]). This is to enable asking end users for
consent before collecting or transmitting any data to Memfault services.

Once the end user has given their consent, you can enable data collection like
so:

```shell

> $ memfaultd --enable-data-collection # Or its shorthand memfaultd -e

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
$ memfaultd --enable-data-collection

# Or its shorthand
$ memfaultd -e
```

```

Alternatively, you can set `"enable_data_collection": true` in

> `/etc/memfaultd.conf` and subsequently restart the service.

Reviewer: Should we suggest the runtime conf path instead here (because /etc/memfaultd.conf is expected to be read only)?

Author: Hmm in that case I would remove this suggestion since `memfaultd -e` does exactly that.

Reviewer: Yes, let's remove. Good point!

import {
  LinuxBuildSystemOptionsTabs,
  SYSTEM_YOCTO,
  SYSTEM_OTHER,
} from "@site/src/components/LinuxBuildSystemOptionsTabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

This tutorial will cover integrating the Memfault Linux SDK into a system. This
getting-started guide is designed with systems in mind that are built using
[Yocto][yocto-homepage], but generic instructions are included for other setups.

After you're done, you should have a basic integration setup that can talk to
the Memfault cloud, enabling one or more of the following features:

- Reporting reboot events to Memfault.
- [Over-the-air (OTA) updates][docs-linux-ota].

## Useful links

- The [source for the Memfault Linux SDK][source-sdk].
- A [sample integration using Yocto][source-yocto-example].
- [Reference: `memfaultd` Configuration][docs-configuration].
- [Reference: `memfaultd` CLI][docs-cli].

## Assumptions and dependencies

- The initial releases of our SDK are centered around [Yocto][yocto-homepage]
  and are verified to work on [`4.0 kirkstone`][yocto-kirkstone].
- Your project uses [`systemd`][systemd-homepage] as an init system.

Optionally, as requirements of our [OTA system][docs-linux-ota]:

> - [SWUpdate][swupdate-homepage] as an OTA updates client.

Reviewer 2: I would be careful about claiming compatibility, since hawkBit turned out to be so vaguely specced.

The current situation is like CSS rendering in the 90s, if it works in one client that's no guarantee that it works anywhere else 😅

> - [SWUpdate][swupdate-homepage] as an OTA updates client.

Author: Moved discussion here: https://github.com/memfault/memfault-docs/pull/268#discussion_r931787061

<ProjectAwareCreateAProject />

### Include `memfaultd` in your build

:::tip

Keep [`meta-memfault-example`][source-yocto-example] open as a reference
implementation. Your integration should look similar to it once you're done
following the steps in this tutorial.

:::

The `memfaultd` service is the main orchestrator of the subsystems that conform
and are used by the Memfault Linux SDK. As with all our SDKs, it's
[open-source][source-memfaultd].

Among its responsibilities are:

- Keeping a queue of items to be uploaded to the Memfault cloud.
- Controlling whether data is allowed to be collected from a device or not.
- Interacting with and configuring subsystems such as SWUpdate and collectd.
- Providing configuration access via [CLI][docs-cli].

`memfaultd` is required for integration.

<LinuxBuildSystemOptionsTabs>
  <TabItem value={SYSTEM_YOCTO}>

Include the [`meta-memfault`][source-meta-memfault] layer in your
`bblayers.conf` file.

Since `memfaultd` has a commercial license, you'll need to add an exception for
it, for example in your `local.conf`, in the format `<license>_<package-name>`:

```
LICENSE_FLAGS_ACCEPTED:append = " commercial_memfaultd"
```

> 

Author: https://github.com/memfault/memfault-docs/pull/268#discussion_r931858817

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value={SYSTEM_OTHER}>

Grab a copy of [the source code for `memfaultd`][source-memfaultd] and build
using CMake. The included `builtin.conf` contains built-in defaults for
`/etc/memfaultd.conf` and is not meant to be changed. See
[the section on `/etc/memfaultd.conf`](#add-etcmemfaultdconf-to-your-build) to
learn how to configure `memfaultd` on the target device.

```shell
cd /path/to/source/memfaultd
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```

> 

Author: Good point! I've added this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/16181067/181443516-505edd01-a2f4-4f59-94ee-2a9bb56f1e6f.png)

---
id: linux-getting-started-guide
title: Getting Started
sidebar_label: Getting Started
---

import ProjectAwareCreateAProject from "@site/src/components/ProjectAwareCreateAProject";
import {
  LinuxBuildSystemOptionsTabs,
  SYSTEM_YOCTO,
  SYSTEM_OTHER,
} from "@site/src/components/LinuxBuildSystemOptionsTabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

> This tutorial will cover integrating the Memfault Linux SDK into a system. This

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial will cover integrating the Memfault Linux SDK into your system. This
```

getting-started guide is designed with systems in mind that are built using
[Yocto][yocto-homepage], but generic instructions are included for other setups.

After you're done, you should have a basic integration setup that can talk to
the Memfault cloud, enabling one or more of the following features:

- Reporting reboot events to Memfault.
- [Over-the-air (OTA) updates][docs-linux-ota].

## Useful links

> - The [source for the Memfault Linux SDK][source-sdk].

Reviewer 3: we really need to agree on a style guide at some point, these periods look really out of place to me personally :)

Author: Yeah, I don't even remember where I got my "personal" rules about this from. I previously said "full sentence === use a period", but this is just a phrase.

- A [sample integration using Yocto][source-yocto-example].
- [Reference: `memfaultd` Configuration][docs-configuration].
- [Reference: `memfaultd` CLI][docs-cli].

## Assumptions and dependencies

> - The initial releases of our SDK are centered around [Yocto][yocto-homepage]
>   and are verified to work on [`4.0 kirkstone`][yocto-kirkstone].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The Currently, our SDK is centered around [Yocto][yocto-homepage]
  and is verified to work on [`4.0 kirkstone`][yocto-kirkstone].
```

> - Your project uses [`systemd`][systemd-homepage] as an init system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Your project uses [`systemd`][systemd-homepage] as the init system.
```

Optionally, as requirements of our [OTA system][docs-linux-ota]:

- [SWUpdate][swupdate-homepage] as an OTA updates client.
- [U-Boot][u-boot-homepage], since SWUpdate depends on it.

## Integration steps

> <ProjectAwareCreateAProject />

Reviewer 3: The resulting text does not mention to pick "Linux" as the type. Also, should that component present a screenshot? Would make a nice checkpoint in this doc (and probably the other places where its used).

### Include `memfaultd` in your build

:::tip

Keep [`meta-memfault-example`][source-yocto-example] open as a reference
implementation. Your integration should look similar to it once you're done
following the steps in this tutorial.

:::

The `memfaultd` service is the main orchestrator of the subsystems that conform

> and are used by the Memfault Linux SDK. As with all our SDKs, it's
> [open-source][source-memfaultd].

Reviewer 3: IIRC, we try to avoid the term "open-source" as our license is more restrictive then common OSS licenses
```suggestion
and are used by the Memfault Linux SDK. As with all our SDKs, its [source code is available on GitHub][source-memfaultd].
```

Among its responsibilities are:

- Keeping a queue of items to be uploaded to the Memfault cloud.
- Uploading that data at a specified interval, and recovering from network
  failures using an exponential back-off system, independent from the regular
  refresh interval.

> - Controlling whether data is allowed to be collected from a device or not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Controlling whether data is allowed to be collected (e.g. by user consent) from a device or not.
```

:::

A [default `memfaultd.conf`][source-builtin-conf] (called `builtin.conf` in the
source files) is embedded within the `memfaultd` binary, and the daemon will
fall back to it if `/etc/memfaultd.conf` does not provide an override for a
specific key. All values in it can be overwritten by adding an
`/etc/memfaultd.conf` file to your build, e.g. using a `bbappends` recipe for
`memfaultd` (see an [example][source-yocto-memfaultd-conf-example]). You may
copy parts of the built-in config (or the whole file) to customize configuration
on your target device.

Note that while the sample file has reasonable defaults for most keys, it cannot
guess a value for some fields such as `software_version`, `software_type` or
`project_key`. Hence, a minimal `/etc/memfaultd.conf` file should look like
this:

```json
{
  "software_version": "1.0.0",
  "software_type": "main",
  "project_key": "<YOUR_PROJECT_KEY>"
}
```

Note that `/etc/memfaultd.conf` is designed to be in a read-only filesystem.

Read more about [Software Versions and Hardware
Versions][docs-hardware-version-software-version] to better understand these
core Memfault platform concepts.

> #### Configure a persistent storage directory for `memfaultd`

Reviewer 3: Should we call out that this is mandatory and what data volume to expect? Can this be limited to, say 10MB as well?

In `/etc/memfaultd.conf`:

```json
{
  "software_version": "1.0.0",
  "software_type": "main",
  "project_key": "<YOUR_PROJECT_KEY>",
  // highlight-next-line
  "data_dir": "<YOUR_PERSISTENT_STORAGE_DIR>"
}
```

By default it will be a directory in `/media`. You will most likely need to
change this to wherever your device stores data in a persistent manner.
Requirements for this directory are:

- That it is writable to by `memfaultd`.
- That its data persists after firmware upgrades.

### Set `enable_data_collection`

By default, `enable_data_collection` is `false` (see the [default
configuration][source-builtin-conf]). This is to enable asking end users for
consent before collecting or transmitting any data to Memfault services.

Once the end user has given their consent, you can enable data collection like
so:

```shell
$ memfaultd --enable-data-collection
```

To disable it:

```shell
$ memfaultd --disable-data-collection
```

The `memfaultd` service will restart automatically whenever you run either of
those commands.

### Test the integration

If you've included the reboot reasons plugin, you can test your integration by

> rebooting your test device. Then, on the Memfault app, open **Fleet -> Devices**

Reviewer 3: can we make this a placeholder URL? I think we started doing that in other places recently
